---
layout: post
title: "Forgiveness Finds a Strange New Home for a Mother’s Love"
image: /assets/img/Mary-Oshea.png
image-credit: "Brian Mogren"
excerpt: "Mary Johnson’s story of forgiveness has continued to unfold over a period of more than 18 years. Although it is not a new story, I place it first in my chronicles of forgiveness because of the many lessons and perspectives it contains. (Image: Brian Mogren)"
---
<p><a href="https://www.twincities.com/2010/12/22/unlikely-meeting-unlikely-outcome/">Unlikely Meeting, Unlikely Outcome -></a></p>
<p><a href="http://m.startribune.com/index.php/jon-tevlin-gunshot-took-her-son-but-forgiveness-finally-came/42833927/?section=featuredColumns">Gunshot Took Her Son but Forgiveness Finally Came -></a></p>
<p><a href="https://www.cbsnews.com/news/love-thy-neighbor-sons-killer-moves-next-door/" target="_blank">Love thy neighbor: Son's killer moves next door -></a></p>

<p>Mary Johnson’s story of forgiveness unfolded over a period of more than 18 years. She has become a true paragon of forgiveness and an advocate for restorative justice, but as you will read in the articles linked above, she didn’t start out that way. Like almost anyone struggling with the sudden violent death of a child, she was shocked by the murder of her son. Her loss was life-shattering, and the task of redeeming and forgiving that loss was equally life-changing.</p>
  
<p>At the core of any trauma or transgression is a value we cherish. Rebuilding and reinforcing that value can transform our lives in ways we could never predict. To the extent our lives are bent out of shape by some transgression, then forgiveness can bend us back in a positive direction.</p>

<p>In the beginning Mary was naturally grief-stricken and enraged, and she held her son’s killer in contempt. Believing her faith demanded it, however, she extended forgiveness to the boy and his mother at the boy’s trial. But it wasn’t true forgiveness. It was far too soon for her to forgive. She was just mouthing the words, while inside nothing had changed. I call that pseudo-forgiveness, and it’s far more common than it should be. We pressure ourselves, we are pressured by family, friends, society, or religion to “forgive and forget,” “just get over it” or “move on.” But as I or anyone who’s tried this can tell you, until you understand the transgression and what it means to you, and make some headway grieving it, there is no moving on. Like a dog chained to a stake in the ground, you can only run in the same circle. And where you pace, trying to escape, nothing new can grow.</p>

<p>Mary realized her pseudo-forgiveness wasn’t the real thing, and kept herself open to true forgiveness. She just didn’t know how to approach it. As you see in <a href="https://www.twincities.com/2010/12/22/unlikely-meeting-unlikely-outcome/"><em>Unlikely Meeting, Unlikely Outcome</em></a>, however, Mary got a little assist from a meeting with the mother of a boy convicted of murder. Many people in Mary’s position, maybe all of us depending on circumstances, would shun anyone associated with committing a murder. But clearly, something had moved in Mary by that time. It helped that she was on a quest to understand what had happened to her. Over the years her curiosity and thirst for understanding led her to become more open to embracing vulnerable truths she hadn’t been ready to see before. She saw herself in the mother of the murderer. She saw that they had each, in different ways, lost their precious son. She could see that woman’s pain, and it was remarkably similar to her own. She could meet that woman’s son, and he was remarkably similar to her own. Finding common ground, simple shared humanity, with someone who has transgressed can crack open the door to forgiveness. Even if it’s just a little, it’s enough.</p>

<p>Now, after years of pondering, seeking, and grieving, she loves the killer as her own son. She has transcended her own desire to blame or see herself as a victim. The common experience of the death of her son links her to Oshea forever. Once that link was a conduit for anger, blame, and retribution, and now it is a conduit for love. </p>

<p>I want to finish by touching again on some key parts of Mary’s journey that are common to the work we all need to do in forgiveness. First is the need to experience the anger and pain, and to grieve. I personally would prefer to deny the impact of transgressions because I don’t like the idea that I could be so vulnerable. I hope you are different. But enormities like sudden violent death simply overwhelm us. In any case, we gain nothing by denying the effects the transgression has on us. Transgressions bring loss, and it’s no use trying to forgive when you haven’t even felt the impact of the loss.</p>

<p>Next is to understand why the event affected us the way it has. That tells us what needs to be repaired and reaffirmed in our own life. Not that I can in any way speak for Mary Johnson, but it seems that her role as a mother was the value that she ultimately carried forward. Along with her son, the murder took away her role as a mother. But she reestablished that role in the most poignant way imaginable.</p>

<p>Third is our common humanity, our shared human experience with the transgressor. There is no better friend, and no more deadly enemy, than another human being. The evil we attribute to others is, I guess, a projection of our own vulnerabilities. How dastardly of you to highlight an area of life where I am unable to completely control everything that happens! Rather than see ourselves as vulnerable and attached to our own hopes and expectations, we say “You are evil.” But if you are “evil,” then probably, so am I.</p>

<p>That brings me to my final point: we inevitably share some responsibility for the transgressions we experience and how they affect us. This is in no way blaming ourselves for what happened, but it is important to give an honest accounting of all of the factors that contributed to the event. And some of those factors are either under our control, or they are the result of choices we have made. Mary’s son Laramuin clearly provoked Marlon Green. He did not deserve to die for it, but other choices would certainly have led to other outcomes. Had I loved basketball instead of baseball, or if I could have made a new best friend, I might not have taken it so hard when my family moved to a tiny rural community in the high desert of central Nevada. Had you left a little sooner, or maybe a little later, you might not have gotten cut off on the highway today. And so on.</p>

<p>Thanks for reading. Come back soon for more stories and discussions of forgiveness in the news!</p>
